Biological functions: (1) structural and modulatory, including nutrient storage and sequestration; (2) specific recognition  - by GBP or glycan binding proteins (typically); and (3) molecular mimicry of host glycans. Intrinsic GBPs mediate cell to cell interactions or recognize EC molecules, and recognize glycans on the same cell. Extrinsic GBPs comprise of pathogens. *A given glycan can have different roles in different tissues, at different times in development (organism-intrinsic functions) or in different environmental contexts (organism-extrinsic functions)*. Specific biological functions are mediated via terminal sequences, unusual structures, and modifications of glycans. Genetic defects in glycosolation are easily obtained in cultured cells, but have limited biological impact in Vitro. Same defects in whole organisms may be catastrophic. Thus major glycan functions are operative mainly within an intact multicellular organism.

Glycans have protective, stabilizing,  organizational, and barrier functions. Glycan constituents of matrix molecules, such as proteoglycans, function to control tissue structure, porosity, and integrity. Such molecules also contain binding sites for other specific glycans, which aids overall matrix organization. They also act as a protective storage depot for  biologically key molecules. E.g., heparin-binding growth factors bind GAG chanins of ECM, adjacent to cells that need to be stimulated. This prevents their diffusion, protects from nonspecific proteolysis, and prolongs their active lives, while allowing them to be released under specific conditions. Also, polymerized glycans such as starch and cellulose (in plants) and glycogen (in animals) serve to store & sequester nutrients.

Junk glycans can accumulate similar to junk DNA; but junk DNA consists of selfish DNA elements capable of replicating, whereas glycans cannot encode additional copies of themselves. 

Genomic View: A number of glycosyltransferases (GTs), glycoside hydrolases (GHs, also called glycosidases), nuclear sugar transporters, and other enzymes are required to synthesize and metaboloze glycans. Also, many genes encode glycan binding proteins (GBPs), which bind with specific glycan structures. **The human and mouse glycomes have many glycan structures in common, but a few are unique or have different functional properties**. CAZy database includes 25000 genomes as of 2015 and 158 GTs with a known 3-D structure. Gts from different organisms diplay the same basic structural folds, and we can harness the relationships between the sequence and the specificity of a GT. Number of GT genes is variable, but much less within a taxonomic clade. # of GTs is > the # of GHs (in higher animals). Mammalian genome encodes 100 to 200 GBPs. 

Earlier, GT and GH were given EC (Enzyme Commission) numbers with x (specificity), y(sugar transferred), and z (donor/acceptor name). Could not accomodate enzymes that act on several substrates. A new system: classifies GTs and GHs on the basis of relationship between AA sequence and folding similarities. Sequences that display similarity are grouped in the same family, regardless of activity and substrate specificity. As of August 2016, there are 260K GT sequences in 100 families in CAZy. Each family is annotated with known enzyme activities and includes catalytic and structural features. This is followed by a list of proteins and ORFs for each familty. Families are 'polyspecific', which indicates that (1) new specificity acquisition by GH or GT is a common evolutionary event, (2) their substrate specificities can be engineered for experimental or applied purposes, and (3) their substrate (or product) specificities are governed by fine details of 3-D structure, not by global fold. Human GTs are listed at [KEGG](https://www.genome.jp/kegg/glycan/) and [Functional Glycomics Gateway](http://www.functionalglycomics.org/). The challenge: Role of proteins as GTs of unknown donor, acceptor,and product specificities. 

Glycan Binding Proteins (GBPs): Important to Id all of the GBPs and their glycan ligands. Sequence similarity can now be used to id genes likely to encode GBPs. Eg. MBLs (mannose-binding lectins)-- lectin is a protein that binds to carbs -- are similar in motifs to C-type lectins and has a collegen-like domain that promotes their oligomerization and is needed for host defense. A variant impacts the protein's stability and serum concentration, and the course of different types of infections, autoimmune reactions, and metabolic and CV diseases. MBL variations are frequent. Dual roles of MBL show the *power of genomics to aid our understanding of human disease*. GBPs only in mammals have been explored well so far. There is lack of info on ligand specificity of many GBPs. This can be deduced from the knowledge of existing CRD (carbohydrate recognition domains) - sometimes, not always (they may end up in functionally inactive lectin-like CRD folds). Legume lectins have been studied long and provide the best model for protein-glycan recognition. **Web resource: GlycoPattern**

Vertebrate Gycome: They do not enclode an enormous number of GT genes like plants; have a large diversity of GT genes. 43 CAZy families as with plants. Unique to vertebrates: GT6, GT12 and most of GT29 members. There are no GT families that are unique to humans or pirmates. GHs are scarce - only 100 GHs in human genome code, with a dozen specific to digestion of three glycans: sucrose, lactose, and starch. Digestion of immense majority of the plant cell-wall sacchs in the food is outsourced to microorganisms resident in the gut. 

Modular Glycosyltransferases and Glycoside Hydrolases: **Convergent evolution** - heparan synthase needs both GT47 and GT64; chrondoitin synthase: GT31 and GT7. GHs also can be modular, infrequently so in humans. Eg. microbes involved in plant cell-wall degradation can have 5+ GHs assembled in a single peptide. 

Relationships of **Genomics to Glycomics**: Genome represents the DNA of an organism and hence includes all the genes that produce the glycome, which represents all of the glycans made by an organism. Almost every cell that contains a nucleus and mito have an identical genome, but differ in the portion of the glycome they express. Depends on which genes are actively expressed. **Transcription, splicing, translation, and posttranslational processing and stability** may vary depending on the state of differentiation and physiological environment of a cell. The glycan repertoire of a cell, thus, may vary. So, it is common to **specify the tissue type and growth stage** (fetal liver glycome). Some of the environmental stiumli: PH, ionic strength, hormones, and inflammation. GT transcriptome is a poor predictor of the actual glycome of a given cell type. Currently there is no substitute for carrying out glycoming or glycoproteomic analysis. 
