GBPs (excluding glycan-specific antibodies) are of two types: **lectins and sulfated GAG (glycosaminoglycan)-binding proteins**. Lectins are  identified by **CRDs** (carbohydrate-recognition domains) that define structural similarities. They recognize terminal groups on glycans and fit into shallow and well-defined binding pockets. In contrast, proteins that bind to sulfated GAGs (heparan, chondroitin, dermantan, and keratan sulfates) bind to carboxylinc acid and sulfate groups all along GAG chains via positively charged AAs. Most of these proteins are not evolutionarily related. GBPs that bind to the nonsulfated GG HA (hyaldherins) share an evolutionarily conserved fold that helps with recognition of short segments of the invariant HA repeating disaccharide. 

Castor bean seed extracts were found in 1888 to agglutinate animal RBCs. These 'agglutinins' were later called **lectins ("select"** in Latin) when ABO blood groups could be distinguished with them. More on Endogenous glycan Lectin receptors later. Lectins that recognize exogenous glycans include bloood soluble proteins as well as membrane bound receptors on immunity system cells. Lectins and sulfated GAG-binding proteins found in micororganisms have other names such as *hemagglutinins and adhesins*. 

Sulfated GAG-Binding Proteins are hard to classify based on sequence or structure. Example: Heparin (a GAG, with molecular weight of 3 to 30 kDa) acts as an anticoagulant only in the presence of antithrombin (an enzyme inhibitor GBP, produced by liver and has 432 AAs). GBP are involved in communication between cells, between microbes and hosts, and also in binding growth factors or cytokines. Result: movement of molecules, cells, and information. Directing movement of glycoproteins within and between cells is a common function for lectins. In ER, two lectins (calnexin and calreticulin) bind high-mannose glycans for quality control of protein folding. Binding of glycans on the surface of one cell by GBPs on another cell can induce recognition and adhesion (crosslinking glycans on different cells by lectins is an alternative mechanism). Three **Selectins** are lectins that provide interaction among WBC, platelets, and endothelia. Many lectins are involved in immune responses. Phagocytosis is a typical outcome of binding of macrophage lectins to non-host glycans on bacteria and fungi. Viruses also use their own GBPs to attach to host cells during infection (eg. GBP in influenza virus bind to slalic acids - monosacchs with a 9-C backbone). 

Membrane anchors in lectins span the whole membrane, linking EC CRDs with cytoplasmic domains. This allows for info flow. CRDs are found with many structures, indicating that many different protein folds can accomodate glycan binding. 

**Glycan ligands** for lectins: Monosacchs or small Oligosacchs are low affinity ligands for GBPs (diassociation constants in millimolar range). These intrinsic affinities are enhanced in multiple ways. Eg: conjugation of glycans to proteins and lipids can enhance CRD binding. High-avidity binding occurs between multivalent gycans and clustered CRDs. Stating that a protein (e.g., PSGL-1 or CD44) is “the ligand” for a GBP (P-Selectin and E-Selectin, respectively) is **inaccurate**, in that the protein without the specific glycan is not a ligand. An option is to use a superscript “L” (ligand) to designate these molecules as PSGL-1<sup>PSL</sup> and CD44<sup>ESL</sup>, respectively. 

The online book has specific chapters on different types of lectins, galectins, and proteins that bind sulfated GAGs. Summarize them later. 
