It is a naturally occuring GAG that finds extensive surgical use. As it is viscoelastic, it has lubricating and cushioning attributes that are useful during eye surgery. It has antiadhesvie properties, useful for postsurgical wound healing. It is also used as a tissue filler in cosmetic surgery. GBPs that bind to the nonsulfated GG HA (hyaldherins) share an evolutionarily conserved fold that helps with recognition of short segments of the invariant HA repeating disaccharide. HA is the largest and most abundant GAG: A 70Kg person degrades 5g of HA (molecular mass: 10<sup>7</sup>Da) per day. From Chapter 44 on genetic disorders: 

HAs bind to specific mebrane proteins, including CD44. In some cells, this leads to clustering of CD44, which activates kinases. This alters the interaction of  the cytoplasmic tail of CD44 with regulatory and adaptor molecules that impact the cytoskeletal assembly/disassembly and cell survival and proliferation. Low Molecular weight glycans are more active in triggering danger responses via binding to Toll-like receptor's (TLR's) responses. In contrast, signaling via sulfated GAGs is indirect and has no downstream response. TLRs also respond to tissue injury via binding of released HA fragments as damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs).

From Chapter 44 on genetic disorders: "The largest and most abundant GAG: a 70-kg person degrades 5 g of hyaluronan (molecular mass 107 Da) per day. Degradation of hyaluronan involves a series of two endo-β-N-acetylhexosaminidases called hyaluronidases (Hyal-1 and Hyal-2), β-glucuronidase, and finally β-N-acetylhexosaminidase. Hyal-2 is active at low pH and is GPI-anchored on the cell surface. This enzyme associates both with hyaluronan in lipid rafts and with an Na+/H+ exchanger to create an acidic microenvironment. Cleavage generates fragments of ∼20 kDa (approximately 50 disaccharides), which are internalized, delivered to endosomes, and then finally to lysosomes, where the fragments are degraded by Hyal-1 into tetra- and disaccharides (Figure 44.2). The exoglycosidases are thought to participate in the degradation of the larger fragments as well as that of the di-and tetrasaccharide units. Mutations in HYAL-1 cause MPS IX."
