Glycans in GBP QC: N-glycans affect GBP (membrane and secreting proteins, not cytoplasmi proteins) folding in ER because of their **hydrophilic** nature. In ER, two lectins (calnexin and calreticulin) bind high-mannose glycans for quality control of protein folding. Loss of CNX and CRT leads to a severe phenotype. Mice deficient in CNX reach full term, but half die within 2 days of birth; most die by 3 months. Survivors have motor disorders. CRT-deficient mice also show embryonic lethality. This glycoprotein association with these lectins is transient. 

Free glycans are used as signaling molecules in development, in defense reponses of plants and animals, and in interactions of organisms with one another. Sugars (glucose, fructose, and sucrose) are used by sensing systems involved in sugar metabolism and have signaling events links to hormones. *Low concentration of specific free glycans initiate many biological processes*. 

GAGs are signaling glycans because they interact with receptor tyrosine kinases and/or their ligands and facilitate change in cell behavior. HA is an example. See the HA writeup. HA-dependent signal transduction (via CD44) has cytoplasmic responses that can cause cellular proliferation in cancerous cells.  In addition to mucins,the innate immune systems is the first level of defense (distinguish self from infectious non-self). This is achieved by receptors that ID conserved molecular patterns specific to pathogens. Such *PAMP* (pathogen-associated molecular patterns) are glycans located on the surface of microorganisms. The cognate receptors on the host cells are called as *PRRs* (pattern-recognition receptors). Examples of PRRs: *TLRs* (Toll like Receptor) and mannan-binding lectin. TLR binding induce inflammation and antimicrobial effector responses. TLRs also respond to tissue injury via binding of released HA fragments as damage-associated molecular patterns (*DAMPs*). 

Glycans in systemic Physiology: Glycans and GBPs are important for both male and female reproductive function. Genetic modifications that eliminate initial steps of major glycan synthesis typically result in embryonic lethality. Elimination of GAGs also causes developmental abnormalities, perhaps because of their roles in modulating growth factor function and in setting up morphogen gradients. Impact on blood cells: Many blood group antigens on RBCs are glycans - successful blood transfusion requires donor-recepient compatibility of these antigens. Selectin ligands and their receptors play a role in trafficking of leukocytes from the bloodstream into tissues. Most plasma proteins are N-glycosolated, critical for stability in the circulation (defects in N-glycosolation may lead to low levels of antithrombin III, because of rapid clearance of these proteins from the circulation. **CV physiology**: HA has a critical role in heart development. Angiogenesis is modulated as HAs bind VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor) and firbroblast growth factor. Blood vessel integrity needs glycans, including a high density of sialic acids on the endothelial cells and GAGs within the basement membrane. .. More to add (7/4/2018) from Chapter 41 and on, on diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, Alzheimer's disease, etc. 

Some additions of interest from later chapters:

**Sickle cell anemia**: Symptoms were thought to be caused by vaso-occlusion due to abnormally shaped  and/or membrane modified hypoxic RBCs. Now, is known that abnormal adhesion of multiple cell types is the cause, and this is partially mediated by selectins. Blood flow in a mouse model of sickle cell disease was restored by selectin blockage with analogs of natural ligands sialy Lewis x or heparin. The pan-selectin inhibitor GMI-1070 (now rivipansel) has shown  benefit in dramatically reducing (>80%) the need for opioid pain killers by sickle cell patients. 

**Cardiovascular Medicine**: CV disorders such as stroke, MI, and hypovolemic shock involve restoration of blood flow that is interrupted. Sudden restoration reintroduces leukocytes to the traumatized tissue and causes tissue damange, called reperfusion injury. P-Selectin on the activated endothelium and/or L-selectin on leukocytes initiate this cascade and E-selectin participates later. Blocking this initial selectin-based recognition can reduce this tissue damage. Pharma is developing small molecules for this purpose. Also, many preparations of FDA-approved heparin can block P and L-selectin interactions. 

**Atherosclerosis**: High LDL and low HDL increase the risk of AS lesions in the large arteries. Early lesion (fatty steak) involves entry of monocytes into the subendothelial regions of the blood vessels. P and/or E-selectin on endothelial cells are activated by oxidized lipids in LDL or inflammatory processes. These recognize P-slectin glycoprotein ligand-l (PSGL-1) or sialyl Lewis x on circulating monocytes, facilating this migration. P-selectin deficiency (even more with E-selectin deficiency combined) slows progression of AS lesions. Early intervention is possible as these lesions develop very slowly. Retention of LDLs (bound to proteoglycans) leads to oxidation and uptake by macrophages and SMCs. At the molecular level, apolipoprotein B (the protein moeity of LDL) AAs bind to the negatively charged GAGs of proteoglycans. Reduced sialyation of LDL in patients correlates well with CAD. Desialyated LDL is more easily embedded in the plaques. 
