Simple monosaccharides have the general formula C<sub>x</sub>(H2O)<sub>n</sub>, where n is an integer ranging from 3 to 9. The acyclic (aldehyde or Ketone) form of a monosacch is present in small amount (<0.01%). However, they impact the chemical reactions that eventually consume the sugar. Aldoses and ketoses were historically referred to as 'reducing sugars.' They can also undergo Schiff's base formation with amines or hydrazides, forming imines and hydrazones, respectively. This reaction occurs in forming protein glycoconjugate. 

Only sources of energy for living organisms are monosacchs. Glycans are oligosacchs (with <12 monosacchs) or polysacchs (with >12 monosacchs). The latter may have repeating subunits of linked monosacchs. Such assemblies lead to enormous diversity and widely varying properties (cell-surface interactions, proteins involved in differentiation, recognition, and proliferation of cells, and structural support). 

Most animal cell-surface polysacchs are GAGs. Also abundant in ECM, they are linear macromolecules with molecular mass > 15K Da. Building blocks of GAGs: amino-substituted sugar and a hexuronic acid residue. The sulfates and hexuronic acid carboxylate groups are negatively charged under *physiological conditions*. GAGs are the most anionic molecules present in the animal world. Common GAGs: chrondoitin sulfate, dermatan sulfate, heparan sulfate, hyaluronan, and keratan sulfate. GAGs show biological function through interaction with hundreds of GAG-binding proteins found in cellular surfaces and in extracellular spaces. Strength and specificty of the binding depends on their structure. HS, the most studied GAG member, has many physiological and pathophysiological functions. Unlike proteins and nucleic acids, GAG biosynthesis is not directed by a specific template; however, a unique pathway exists for each GAG type. 

Glycosylation: *After more than 3 B years of evolution, every free-living cell and every-cell type within multicellular organisms remains covered with a dense and complex layer of glycans*. Most secreted molecules are glycoslyated and ECM (in multicellular organisms) are rich in glycans and glycanconjugates. Glycans are the most diverse and flexible molecules at the interface of cells and extracellular environment. Reasons: **relative hydrophilicity, flexibility, and mobility in aqueous environments and their high diversity, allowing short-term and long-term adaptations to changing environments and pathogen regimens**. "All forms of glycosylation in the secretory pathway are highly ordered and sequential processes, typically involving glycosyltransferase reactions. Glycosyltransferase are  enzymes that transfer activated forms of monosaccharides from nucleotide sugars and lipid-linked sugar intermediates to acceptors including proteins, lipids, and growing glycan chains." 

Glycosylation Precursors: Glucose and fructose are the major carbon and energy sources for yeast to humans. Other monosacchs are synthesized from these sources. Monosacchs must be activated to a high-energy donor for use in glycan synthesis. GLUT (glucose transporter) family of transporters (encoded by *SLC2A* - solute carriers 2A -14 genes in humans) and sodium-dependent glucose transporters (SGLT) (encoded by *SLC5A* genes). 

Glycogen has 100K glucose units and is the major storage of polysacch in animal cells. Its synthesis and degradation (glycogenolysis) are highly regulated for energy use. Non-ATP-dependent reaction. 

Glycosidases are a very large family of enzymes with 135 members currently listed in the [CAZy database](http://www.cazy.org/). Unlike G..transferases, these evolved independently many times. They are involved in degradation of glycan structures for uptake and metabolism of sugars and for the turnover of glycoconjugates in cellular processes. 
