**N-Glycans**: Biosynthesis of N-glycans is most complex in mammals. They are covalently attached to protein at Asn residues by an N-glycosidic bond. Mouse mutants have helped gain insight on the functional aspects. Deletion of *Mgat1* gene that encodes MGAT1 leads to embryonic death. They are important in **retaining** growth factor and cytokine receptors at the cell suface. N-Glycans are knon to become more branched in cancer cells which accelerates the cancer progression. Tumors formed in mice with MGAT5 deleted are retarded in their progression. Thus, certain GTs may be appropriate targets for cancer therapy. 

Structures common to different glycans (N and O-glycans, and glycolipids): mature glycans extend these cores and may include human blood group determinants. The **ABO** blood group antigens are presented on type-1 or type-2 LacNAc, on O-GalNAc glycans (type-3), or on glycolipds (type-4). These are formed by the sequential action of GTs encoded by the *ABO, H,* and *Se* genes, now termed the *ABO, FUT1,* and *FUT2* loci.  They are expressed on membrane glycoproteins and glycolipids on the surface of RBCs and many epithelial and endothelial cells in tissues. On each human RBC, ~80% of about 1 to 2 M ABO(H) determinants are attached to the anion transport protein Band 3, and ~15% are attached to the glucose transport protein Band 4.5. Each RBC has other glycoproteins and about 0.5 M glycolipids with ABO(H) determinant. Early in the postnatal period, the immune system generates igM antibodies against ABO antigen9s), even theough they are abssent from RBCs. Reason: glycan antigens similar or identical to the A and B bllod group determinants are carried by colonizing bacteria and fungi. Eg. Blood group B individuals show ciculating IgM anti-A isoagglutinins, but not for the self angien of blood group B. From the study of [Bombay](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK453042/) phenotype, it is evident that developmental or physiological functions for the A, B, and H antigens, if they ever existed, are no longer relevant. But relative risk of infection may vary. People with **Blood group O** who are Lewis-antigen positive are most susceptible to *H. pylori* - because it binds well to glycans with terminal Fuc, found in H and Lewis antigens. The AB group is susceptible to gastroenteritis. ABO status may also be protective. Group A is most impacted by malaria, with Group O the least (from a paper I read, not from this book summary).

Human milk comprises of many hundreds of different glycans with typically <15 sugars. They protect the infact from enteric pathogens. Lactose is generated only in the lactating mamarian gland. Pituitary glycoprotein hormones Lutropin (LH) and thyrotropic (TSH) have sulfated glycans, but not FSH (follicle-stimulating Harmone). 

**Sialic acids**: They are abundant on vertebrate glycoproteins and have diverse functional roles. They carry info on glycan-protein, cell-cell, and pathogen-cell recognition. Present in high density on cells - they exert many functions via electonegative charge (eg., repulsion of cell-cell interactins, protein stabilization, ion binding, and ion transport) and propensity to bind water. One of the most rapidly evolving glycan classes in nature. **Atherosclerosis** relevance: Neu5Gc is common in mammals, but is not synthesized in humans, because of a single exon deletion in the *CMAH* gene encoding the hyroxylase enzyme that converts CMP-Neu5Ac to CMP-Neu5Gc. Despite this, traces of Neu5Gc are found in nomal human tissues, perhaps ingested from foods, particularly 'red meats.' Most healthy humans have circulating anti-Neu5Gc antibodies; this may lead to inflammation in diseases that correlate with red meat consumption, such as **atherosclerosis and epithelial cancers, pathologies uncommon to Neu5Gc-positive primates**. A consistent but unexplained observation: There is scarcity of Neu5Gc in brains of all vertebrates, including those with high Neu5Gc levels elsewhere. Functions of Sialic acids: Mucins are heavily glycosylated sialoglycoproteins found on epithelial surfaces in airways, and the Gi and UI tracts of animals. They serve to hydrate and protect tissue surfaces that come in contact with the environment. Sialic acids can act as biological masks, preventing  recognition of underlying glycans by intrinsic and extrinsic glycan-binding proteins. 

Role in infection for Sialic acids: WBC must bind and move across the blood vessel wall to clear bacterial infections in tissues. Endothelial cells respond to bacterial **infection** nearby and quickly send Sil-binding lectins to their surface. **E- and P-selectins** connect with WBC which have the complementary sialogycans on their surface lipids or proteins. WBC so snagged eventually respond to cytokines presented by GAGs and work their way into the tissue to fight bacteria. Without Sia-dependent binding E- and P-selectins, **inflammation** response is compromised and persistent tissue infections ensue. L-selectin helps in trafficking of lymphocytes from blood to lymph. *All these effects were discovered serendipitously*. No systematic effort has been undertaken so far. 
Certain sialyated molecules are also specific markers for some cancers and potential ligands for targeted therapies. 

Therapeutic Applications: Competitive inhibitors of viral sialidases (Relenza and Tamiflu) for influenza A and B viruses. Sialoglycoproteins have been developed as drugs, including **erythropoietin** to enhance RBC production and monoclonal antibodies to target various diseases including cancers. 

**Hyaluronan**: Animal cells and some bacterial produce HA, a high molecular weight, nonsulfated GAG synthesized at the cell surface and extruded in the EC matrix. Its functions are highly diverse and versatile. Originally extracted from vitreous humor (hyaloid means vitreous), it contains uronic acid and has a simple repeating disacch motif (GlcNAcβ4GlcAβ3). HA is not further modified by sulfation or by conversion of glucouronic acid to iduronic acid.  HA evolved concurrently (or a bit earlier)  to the advent of cartilage and appendicular skeletons, perhaps as a paralog of the more ancient cell-surface enzymes producing other β-linked polymers like chitin and cellulose. Most all cells can produce HA, and its expression correlates with tissue expansion and cell motility.  HA has essential roles in development, tissue architecture, cell proliferation, signaling reactions across the plasma membrane, inflammation, and microbial virulence. 

It has 10<sup>4</sup> disacchs with total length of ~10 µm (∼1 nm/disaccharide). The carboxyl groups are negatively charged at physiological pH and ionic strength, thus making HA polyanionic. Result is a relatively stiff, random coil structure. they occupy a large hydrodynamic volume (3-5 mg/mL of HA will essentially occupy all of the solvent). This leads to a sieve in which small molecules can diffuse freely, whereas larger molecules less so. This solution shows high viscosity with viscoelastic properties, as found in viterous humor and synovial joints. In the latter case, it helps by distributing load during joint motion and for protecting the cartilage. Mammalian HAS (HA synthase) genes (*Has 1-3*) are homologous to those from *Streptococcus* and *E.coli*. In cultured cells, hyperglycemia (3* normal) results in HA synthesis. It can also be regulated by phosphorylation and addition of O-GlcNAc. The human hyaluronidase gene (*HYAL*) family is complex, with two sets of three contiguous genes located on two chromosomes. 3p21.3 (*HYAL1, 2*, and *3*) have major roles in somatic tissues. *HYAL4* at 7q31.3 is for chondroitinase; *PHYAL1* is a pseudogene; and *SPAM1* is specific to testes. Turnover of HA is rapid (half life ~ 1 day), but may reside much longer (eg. in cartilage). An adult human has 15g of HA and 1/3rd is turned over daily (either locally or at lymph nodes or liver). They  remove HA via specific receptors, such as LYVE-1 (a homolog of CD44) and HARE (HA receptor for endocytosis). HARE is the major one. Large HA molecules interact with these receptors, and  are fragmented by HASs (HYAL2 and TMEM2). HYAL1 is involved in ER to degrade further to monosacchs. *Note:* *Hyal2*-null mice die at E9.5 and Tmem2-deficient mice accumulate HA. 

HA fragments (Low MW parts) may act as endogenous signal of injury, or during infection by Group A *Streptococcus*, which has a HA capsule. This is mediated through CD44 receptor, which modulates response through toll-like receptors. Signaling depends on the size of HA fragments. 

HA has multiple roles in early development, tissue organization, and cell proliferation. *Has2*-null mouse is embryonic lethal (when heart is formed - formation of heart values require HA - another experiment); *Has1-, Has3-* null mice show no obvious developmental phenotype. HA needs binding proteins on cell surface and/or secreted onto the ECM. One class: link module family of hyaldherins. A link module is a link protein that  contains two homologous repeats of a sequence motif. Proteins that have a link module, including link proteins (HAPLN-1 through -4 in humans), several proteoglycans, and other extracellular matrix proteins, can interact specifically with HA. Aggrecan, the major cartilage proteoglcan, has two link modules that interact with HA.  Aggrecan fails to anchor to HA, if HAPLN-1 (another link protein) is absent. Mice deficient in HAPLN-1 show defects in cartilage development and delayed bone formation. Most die of respiratory failure shortly after birth. 

Four proteoglycan genes with homologous G1 domains interact with HA (versican, neurocan, breviacan, and aggrecan). V is found in soft tissues and is important in **vascular biology**. N and B in brain tissue; V and A anchor to HA in tissues  with similar lin protein mechanisms. Thus, HA acts as a **scaffold** on which to build proteoglycan aggregate structures adapted to diverse tissue functions. 

HA-Binding proteins with link modules: They belong to "hyaluronan and proteoglycan link proteins" (HAPLNs). They are expressed in many tissues. Four cell-surface receptors are expressed on endothelial cells and activated macrophages: CD44, LYVE-1, HARE/STABILIN-2, and STABILIN-1. They have EC domains with one link module. Other HA-binding proteins are secreted and include the aggrecan superfamily (versican, neurocan, breviacan, and aggrecan) and TNF genet 6 (TSG-6). 

HA expression increases cell adhesion and locomotions as it is expressed abundantly during morphogenesis and in both physiological and pathological invasive processes. CD44 and RHAMM are two major HA-binding proteins on cell surface. Changes in CD44 expression are associated with different tumors and metastatic spread. Interactions of CD44 and RHAMM with HA can influence cell survival.  Their inhibition by hyaluronan oligomers and soluble hyaluronan-binding proteins suggests novel therapeutic approaches for treating **cancer**.  

HA as a therapeutic agent: short-term relief in OA; cataract surgery; as subdermal injection to fill wrinkles. 

Low MW HA (~10<sup>3</sup>–10<sup>4</sup> Da)) have strong biological activities via altering selective signaling pathways. In cancel: HA induces apoptosis and inhibit tumor growth in vivo (by boosting immune responses and altering new blood vessel growth). Now, recomb forms of HA with different MW is feasible. 


